the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT open
courseware at
ocw.mit.edu today we're going to see how
to use what we saw last time about
partial derivatives
to handle minimization or maximization
problems involving functions of several
variables
so before that so remember last time we
said that when we have a function say of
two variables X and Y then we have
actually two different
derivatives partial F partial X also
called f subx is the derivative with
respect to X keeping y constant
and we have partial F partial
y also called f sub
y where we VAR Y and we treat X as a
constant okay and now one thing I didn't
have time to tell you about but
hopefully you heard about in recitation
yesterday is the approximation
formula that tells you what
happens if you vary both X and
Y
so F subx tells us what happens if we
change x a little bit by some small
amount Delta x f sub y tells us how F
changes if we change y by a small amount
Delta y if we do both at the same time
then the two effects will add up with
each
right because you can imagine that first
you will change X and then you will
change y or the other way around it
doesn't really matter
so if we
change
X by a certain amount Delta X and if we
change y by the amount Delta Y and let's
say that we have zal f ofx y then and
that
changes by an amount which is
approximately f subx * Delta X Plus F
sub y * Delta
y okay and that's one of the most
important formulas about partial
derivatives okay so the intuition for
this again is just the two effects add
up if I change X by a small amount and
then I change y well first changing X
will modify f how much does it modify f
the answer is the rate of change is f
subx and if I change y then the rate of
change of f when I change Y is f sub y
so Al together I get this change in the
value of F and of course that's only an
approximation formula actually there
would be higher order terms involving
second and third derivatives and so
on so one way to justify this
sorry I was distracted by microphone
problem okay
so how do we
justify this
formula well one way to think about it
is in terms of tangent plane
oximation so let's think about the
tangent plane to the graph of the
function
f okay so I have some pictures to show
you it will be easier if I show the
pictures okay so
remember partial F partial
X was obtained by looking at the
situation where Y is held constant so
that means I'm slicing the graph of f by
a plane that's parallel to the XZ plane
and then when I change x z changes and
the slope of that is going to be the
derivative with respect to
X so now if I do the same in the other
direction then I will have similarly the
slope in a slice now parallel to the YZ
plane that will be partial F partial y
so in fact in each case I have a line
and that line is tangent to the surface
so now if I have two lines tangent to
the surface well then together the
determine for me the tangent plane to
the
surface okay so let's try to see how
that
works
so we
know that F subx and F sub y are
slopes are the slopes of two tangent
lines
to this plane sorry two tangent lines to
the graph and let's write down the
equations of these lines I'm not going
to write parametric equations I'm going
to write them in terms of XYZ
coordinates
so let's say that partial F of a partial
X at a given point is equal to
a then that means that we have a
line given by the following
conditions so I'm going to keep y
constant equal to
y0 and I'm going to change X and as I
change x z will change at a
rate uh that's equal to a so that would
be Z equals z0 plus a * the change in x
X -
x0 okay that is how you would describe
the
line that's I guess the one that's
ploted in green here that's the
intersection with a slice parall to the
XZ plane I hold y constant equal to y0
and Z is a function of X that varies
with a rate of
a okay
and now if I look similarly at the other
slice let's say that the partial with
respect to Y is equal to B then I get
another line which is obtained by the
fact that Z now will depend on
Y and the rate of change with respect to
Y will be
B while X is held constant equal to x0
so these two lines are both going to be
in the tangent plane to the surface
so they're both tangent to the graph of
F and well together they determine a
plane and that plane is just given by
the formula Z = Z 0 + a * x - x0 + B *
Yus
y0 right if
you look at what happens so this is the
equation of a
plane Z equals constant * X Plus
constant * y plus constant and if you
look at what happens if I hold y
constant and Vary X I recover the first
line if I hold x constant and very y I
get the second
line okay another way to do it of course
would be to write actually parametric
equations of these lines get vectors
along them and then take the cross
product to get the normal Vector to the
plane and then get this equation for the
plane using the normal Vector that also
works and it gives you the same formula
so you know if you're
curious exercise do it again using
parametrics and using cross product to
get the plane equation
okay so that's how we get the tangent
plane and now what this approximation
formula here says is that in fact the
graph of the function is close to the
tangent plane okay if we were moving on
the tangent plane this would be an
actual equality Delta Z would be a
linear function of Delta X and Delta Y
and the graph of the function is near
the tangent plane but it's not quite the
same so it's only an approximation for
small Delta X and small Delta y
so the approximation
formula
says the graph of
f is close to its tangent
plane okay and we can use that formula
of here now to estimate how the value of
f changes if I change X and Y at the
same
time okay questions about
that okay so now that we've CAU up with
what we were supposed to see on
Tuesday I can tell
you now about Max and Min problems
so that's going to be an application of
partial
derivatives to look
at optimization problems
okay so maybe you know 10 years from now
when you have a real job your job might
be to actually minimize the cost of
something or maximize the profit of
something or um whatever but typically
the function that you will have to you
know strive to minimize or maximize will
depend on several variables so if you
have a function of one variable um you
know that to find its minimum or it's
maximum you look at the derivative and
you set that equal to zero and you try
to then look at what happens to the
function so here it's going to be kind
of
similar except of course we have several
derivatives okay
so for today we'll think about a
function of two variables but it works
exactly the same if you have three
variables 10 variables a million
variables
so the first observation is
that so if we have a local
minimum or a local
maximum then both partial
derivative so partial F partial X and
partial F partial y are both zero at the
same time so why is that well let's say
that f subx is zero that means when I
vary X well to first order the function
doesn't change maybe that's because it's
going through if I look only at the
slice parallel to the x-axis then maybe
I'm going through the minimum but then
if parti F parti Y is not zero then
actually by changing y I could still
make the value larger or smaller so that
wouldn't be an actual maximum or minimum
it would only be uh maximum or minimum
if I stay in the slice but if I allow
myself to change y that doesn't work so
I need actually to know that if I change
y the value will not change either to
first order so that's why I also need
partial F partial y to be zero now let's
say that they're both zero well why is
that enough it's essentially enough
because of this formula telling me that
if both of these guys are zero then to
first order the function doesn't change
and then of course there will be maybe
quadratic terms that will actually turn
that you know this won't really say that
your function is actually constant it
will just tell you that maybe U it will
be actually quadratic or higher order in
Delta X and Delta y That's what you
expect to have at a maximum or a
minimum
okay
so we
have okay so that condition is the same
thing as saying that the tangent plane
to the
graph is actually going to be
horizontal okay and that's what you want
to have say you have a minimum well see
that the tangent plane at this point at
the bottom of the graph is going to be
horizontal
and you can see that on this equation of
a tangent plane when both these
coefficients are zero that's when the
equation becomes Z equals constant a
horizontal
plane okay does that make
sense okay so we'll have a name for this
kind of point because actually what
we'll see very soon is that these
conditions are necessary but they're not
sufficient there's actually other kinds
of points where the partial derivatives
are zero so let's give a name to
this we
say definition we say that
X let's say x0 y0 is a critical point of
f if
the partial derivative with respect to X
and the partial derivative with respect
to
Y are both
zero okay more generally you would want
all the partial derivatives no matter
how many variables you have you want all
the partials to be zero at the same
time
okay so let's see and
example so let's
say I give you the function f of XY
equals x 2 - 2x y + 3 y^
2 +
2x - 2
y
okay and let's try to figure out whether
we can minimize or maximize
this well so what we start doing
immediately is taking the partial
derivatives okay so what is f
subx starts with
2x
minus 2 y + 0 +
2 okay remember that Y is a constant so
this differentiates to
zero now if we do F sub
y that's going to be well 0 -
2x + 6
Yus
2 and what we want to do is set these
things equal to zero and we want to
solve these two equations at the same
time okay so an important thing to
remember I mean maybe I should have told
you couple of weeks ago already if you
have two equations to solve well it's
very good to try to simplify them by
adding them together or whatever but you
you must keep two equations okay if you
have two equations you shouldn't end up
with just one equation out of
nowhere okay so for example here we can
certainly simplify things by summing
them together see if we add
them together well the x is cancel and
the constants cancel and in fact we just
left with 4 y = z that's pretty good
that tells us why should should be zero
but then we should of course go back to
these and see what else we know well now
it tells us so if you put y equal 0 it
tells you 2x + 2 =
0 that tells you xals minus one okay so
we have one critical
point that's XY
equal min-1 and z
okay any questions so
far no well you should have a question
question should be how do we know if
it's a maximum or a
minimum well yeah so if we had a
function of one variable we would decide
Things based on the second derivative
and in fact we'll see tomorrow how to do
things based on the second derivative
but that's kind of tricky because
there's a lot of second derivatives I
mean we already have two first
derivatives you can imagine that if you
keep taking partials you may end up
with you know more and
more uh so we'll have to figure out
carefully what the condition should be
so we'll do that
tomorrow for now let's just try to look
a bit
at you know how do we understand this
things by
hand
so in fact let me point out to you
immediately that there's more than
Maxima and Minima so remember we
saw you know the example of x2+ y^2 that
has a critical point that critical point
is obviously a
minimum and of course it could be a
local minimum because it could be that
you know if you have a more complicated
function there's indeed a minimum here
but then elsewhere the function drops to
a lower value so we call that just we
call that just a local minimum to say
that it's a minimum if you stick two
values that are close enough to that
point of course you also have a local
maximum well I didn't plot it but it's
easy to plot okay that's a local
maximum but there's a third example of
critical point and that's a saddle point
okay so the saddle point it's a new
phenomenon that you don't really see
in a single variable calculus it's a
critical point that's neither a minimum
nor a maximum because depending on which
direction you look in it's either one or
the other so here see the point in the
middle at the origin is a settle Point
um just you know if you look at the
tangent plane to this graph you'll see
that it's actually horizontal
at the origin you have this mountain
pass you know at a mountain pass um the
ground is horizontal but depending on in
which direction you go you go up or
down so we say that a point is a settle
point if it's neither a minimum nor a
maximum Okay so
possibilities could be a local mean a
local Max or a
s okay so tomorrow we'll see how to
decide which one it is in general using
second
derivatives uh for this time let's just
try to do it you know by hand
so I just want to
observe in fact I can try to you know
these examples that I have here they x +
y s y^ sare - x there sums or
differences of squares and if we know
that we can put think as a sum of
squares for example will be done so
let's try to express this maybe as the
square of
something well so the problem the main
problem is this 2x y but observe we know
something that starts with x^2 - 2x y
that is actually the square of something
else right it would be x s - 2x y
well plus y^2 not plus 3
y^2
so let's try to do that so we're going
to complete the
square
so I'm going to say it's x - y^
2 and then so that gives me the first
two terms and also a y squ while I still
need to add two more y squares
and I also need to add of course the 2X
and minus 2
y it's simpler it's still not simple
enough for my taste I can actually do
better see I mean now what's so these
guys look like a sum of squares but here
I have this extra stuff but oh 2x - 2 y
well that's twice x - y it looks like
maybe we can modify this and make this
into another
Square okay so in fact I can simplify
this further to x - y + 1 s see if it
would start like maybe I should put
parenthesis here that would be x - y^ 2
plus t x - Y and then there's a plus one
well we don't have that plus one so
let's remove it by subtracting
one okay oh so let me that minus one
here and I still have my 2
y^2 okay do you see why this is the same
function as that
one
yeah so again you know if I expand x - y
+ 1 2 I get x - y^ 2 + twice x - y
That's both guys plus one but I will
have a minus one they will cancel out
and then I have a plus 2 y^2
okay so now what I know see this is a
sum of two squares minus
one and this critical point x y = - 1 0
that's exactly when this is zero and
that is zero so that's the smallest
value this is
always greater or equal to zero same
with that one so that's always at least
minus one and minus one happens to be
the value at the critical
point so it's a
minimum okay now of course here I was
very
lucky in general I couldn't expect
things to simplify that much in fact I
cheated I started from that I expanded
and then that's how I got my
example Okay so
the general method will be a bit
different but you will see it will
actually also involve completing squares
just there's more to it than what we've
seen okay
so we'll come back to this
tomorrow uh sorry oh do I how do I know
that this
equals uh Y is what negative one sorry
like how do
you that whole function
iser how do I know that that whole
function is greater or equal to negative
one well I wrote F of XY as something
squar + 2 y^ 2us
1 okay this squared it's always a
positive number non
negative right it's a square the square
of something is always always non
negative similarly y^2 is also always
non- negative so if you add something
that's at least zero plus something
that's at least zero and you subtract
one you get always at least minus
one and in fact the only way that you
can getus one is if both of these guys
are zero at the same
time
okay
so that's how I get my minimum
so more about this
tomorrow so in fact what I would like to
tell you about now
instead is a nice application of minmax
problems that maybe you don't think of
as a min Max problem but you will see
because I mean you don't think it that
way because probably your calculator can
do it for you or if not your computer
can do it for you but it's actually
something where the theory is based on
minimization in two variables so very
often in experimental Sciences you have
to do something called list squares
interpolation and what is that about
well it's the idea that
maybe you do some experiment and you
know you record some data so you have
some data X and some other data Y and I
don't know maybe for example X is U you
know maybe you're measuring frogs and
you're trying to measure how big the
frog leg is compared to the eyes of a
frog or whatever or you know trying to
measure something and you know if you're
doing
then it could be you know how much you
put of some reactant and the output how
much of the output product that you
wanted to synthesize is generated or all
sorts of
things uh make up your own example but
so you know you measure basically for
various values of X what the value of y
ends up being and then you know you
would like to claim oh well these points
are kind of aligned and of course to a
mathematician they're not aligned but to
an experimental scientist that's
evidence that there's a Rel between the
two and so you want to claim and you
know in your paper you will actually
draw a nice little line like that see
these two functions depend linearly on
each other okay so the question is how
do we come up with that nice line that
passes smack in the middle of the
points
so the question is
given experimental data
x i y
i so maybe I should actually be more
precise so you're given some
experimental data you have you know data
point X1 y1 X2 Y2 and so on xn
YN the question would be
find the best
fit line
of the form yal ax plus b that
somehow in you know approximates very
well this
data so you know you can also use that
by the way to predict various things for
example if you look at your new homework
actually the first problem asks you to
predict how many iPods will be on this
planet in 10
years okay uh looking at you know past
sales and how they behave um one thing
by the way before you you know lose all
the money you don't have yet uh you
cannot use that to predict the stock
market
okay so don't try to use that to make
money it doesn't
work
so one tricky thing here that I want to
draw your attention to is what are the
unknowns here
so the natural answer would be to say
well the unknowns are X and Y that's not
actually the case okay we're not trying
to solve for some X and Y I mean we have
some values given to us and when we look
for when we're looking for that line we
don't really care about a particular
value of x what we care about is
actually these coefficients A and
B that will tell us what the relation is
between X and Y so in fact we are trying
to solve for for A and B that will give
us the nicest possible line through
these
points okay so the
unknowns in our equations will have to
be a and b not X and Y
okay
so the question really is find the
best A and
B and of course we have to decide what
we mean by
best so best will mean that we minimize
some function of A and B that measures
the total error that we are making when
we're choosing this line compared to the
experimental data so maybe roughly
speaking it should measure how far these
points are from the
line but now there's various ways to do
it and some of them are I mean they're
all actually you know a lot of them are
valid they give you different
answers you have to decide what it is
that you prefer
so for example you could measure the
distance to the line you know by
projecting
perpendicularly or you could measure
instead the difference between for a
given value of x the difference between
the experimental value of y and the
predicted one and that's often more
relevant because you know these guys are
actually maybe expressing different
units they're not the same type of
quantity so you can't actually combine
them arbitrarily but
um anyway so the convention is usually
we measure distance in this way next you
could try to minimize the largest
distance you know say we look at where's
the largest error and we make that the
smallest possible the drawback of doing
that is experimentally very often you
have one data point that's not good
because maybe you know you fell asleep
in front of the experiment and so you
didn't measure the right thing so you
you tend to want to you know not give
too much importance to some data point
that's far away from the others so maybe
instead you want to measure you know the
average
distance or maybe you want to actually
give more weight to things that are
further away and then you don't want to
do the distance but the square of the
distance so there's various possible
answers but one one of them gives us
actually a particularly nice formula for
a and b and so that's why it's the
universally used one okay and so here it
says list
squares uh so that that's because we'll
measure actually the sum of the squares
of the
errors and why do we do that well part
of it is because actually it looks good
I mean you know when you see these
plots in you know scientific papers they
really look like the line is indeed the
ideal line and the second reason is
because actually the minimization
problem that we will get is particularly
simple well posed and it's easy to solve
so we'll have a nice formula for the
best a and the best
B so you know if you have a method
that's simple and gives you a good
answer then that's probably the good one
so okay so we have to Define best and
here it's in the sense
of
minimizing the total square
l so or maybe I should say total square
deviation me do that
instead okay so what do I mean by that
so the
deviation for each data
point is the difference between what you
have measured and what you are
predicting by your
model okay so that's the difference
between Yi and ax I plus
b
okay so
now what we'll do is we'll try to
minimize the function capital D which is
just the sum for all the data points of
the square of a deviation
okay
so let me emphasize again this is a
function of A and B I mean of course
there's a lot of letters in here but x i
and Yi in real life there will be
numbers given to you there will be the
numbers that you have measured you've
measured all of this data they are just
going to be numbers you put them in
there and you get a function of a and
b okay
any
questions
um yes
no
okay so how do we minimize this function
of a and b well let's use our new
knowledge let's actually look for a
critical point
so we want to
solve for partial D over partial aals Z
and partial D over partial b equals z
that's how we look for critical
points
so let's take the derivative of this
with respect to
a well so it's going to be well the
derivative of a sum is sum of the
derivatives and now we have to take the
derivative of this quantity squared so
okay remember how we take the derivative
of a square we take twice this quantity
times the derivative of what we're
squaring so we'll get 2
* minus Yi sorry y IUS ax i
b times the derivative of this with
respect to a what's the derivative of
this with respect to a negative x i
exactly okay and so we'll want this to
be
zero and partial D over partial B we do
the same thing but differentiating with
respect to b instead of with respect to
a so again sum of squares twice y i
minus a x i plus b times derivative of
this with respect to B is
is I think negative one
okay so that's the equations we have to
solve well let's reorganize this a
little
bit
so the first equation
so see there's A's and there's B's in
these equations I'm going to just look
at the coefficients of A and B if you
have good eyes you can see probably that
these are actually linear equations in A
and B although there's a lot of clutter
with all these x's and Y all over the
place okay so let's actually try to
expand things and make that more
apparent
so first thing I will do is I will
actually get rid of these factors of two
that are just you know not very
important I can simplify things by
two and next I'm going to look at the
coefficient of a well I will get
basically a * x i
2 well let me just do it
and and it should be
clear so I claim when we simp simplify
this we get x i 2 *
a plus x i *
B minus x i
Yi and we set this equal to
zero okay do you agree that this is what
we get when we expand that product
yeah kind
of okay let's do the other
one so we just multiply by minus one so
we take the opposite of that it will be
a x i plus b and we'll write that as X X
I A Plus B minus
Yi
and oh sorry I forgot the N
here and let me just reorganize that by
actually putting you know all the A's
together that means actually I will have
sum of all the x i squ * a plus sum of x
i * B minus sum of x i y i equal Z
so if I Rite this it
becomes sum of x i 2 * a plus sum of the
x
i *
B minus let me move the other guys to
the other side equals sum of
x i
Yi and that one
becomes sum of x i * a plus how many B's
do I get from this
one well I get one for each data point
when I sum them together I will get n
very good so n * b equals sum of
Yi okay now this quantities they look
scary but they're actually just numbers
right so for example for this one you
look at all your data points for each of
them you take the value of x and you
just sum all these numbers
together so what you get actually is a
linear system in a and
b a 2 by two linear
system and so now we can solve this for
a and
b so in practice of course first you
plug in the numbers for x i and Yi and
then you solve the system that you
get okay and we know how to solve 2 by
two linear systems I
hope okay so that's how we find the best
fit line now why is that going to be the
best one instead of the worst one you
know we just solve for a critical point
that could actually be a maximum of this
error function D well so we'll have
actually the answer to that next time uh
but trust me if you really want to go
through the second derivative test that
we'll see tomorrow and apply it in this
case it's quite hard to check but you
can see it's actually a
minimum so I'll just
say we can show that it's a minimum
okay
now even for the linear case is the one
that we the most familiar with list
squares interpolation actually works in
much more general
settings okay
because instead of fitting for the back
line if you think that there's a
different kind of relation then maybe
you can fit you know in using a
different kind of formula so let me
actually illustrate that with an
example so I don't know if you're
familiar with Mo's law it's something
that's supposed to tell you how quickly
basically computer chips become smarter
faster and faster over time
it's a law that says things about the
number of transistors that you can fit
onto a computer chip so here I have some
data
about oh why
okay
so okay
better so here's data about the number
of transistors
on uh you know standard PC processor as
a function of time and well you know if
you try to do the best line fit well
you'll see quickly that it doesn't seem
to follow a linear Trend
okay on the other hand if you plot the
diagram in a log scale you know with so
the log of a number of transistors as a
function of time then you get a much
better
line okay and so in fact that means that
you had an exponential relation between
the the number of transistors and time
and so actually that's what most law
says it says that the number of
transistors on the chip doubles every so
depending on the version every 18 months
or every two years uh they keep changing
the
statement
but so how do we find that best
exponential
fit well so an exponential fit would be
something of the form y equals a
constant time exponential of a *
X okay that's what we want to look at
well we could try to minimize a square
error like we it before but doesn't work
well at all the equations that you get
are very complicated you can't solve
them but remember what I showed you on
this log
plot right if you plot the log of Y as a
function of X then suddenly it becomes a
linear relation so observe this is the
same as Ln of y equals Ln of C plus a x
and that is a linear best
fit
so what you
do is you just look for the the best
straight line fit for the log of
Y
so that's something we already know but
you can also do other examples for
example let's say that you know we have
something more complicated let's say
that we have actually a
quadratic law so for example Y is of the
form a X2 plus BX plus c
and of course you you're trying to find
you know somehow the
best so that would mean here fitting the
best Parabola for your data
points well to do that you would need to
find a b and c okay and now you would
have actually a
function of a b and c which would be the
sum of the all data points of the square
deviation
and if you try to solve for critical
points so now you will have three
equations involving a b and c and in
fact you will find a 3 by3 linear system
and it works just the same way just you
have a little bit more
data
so
basically you see that these best fit
problems are an example of you know
minimization problem that maybe you
didn't expect to see minimization
problems come in but that's really the
way to handle these
questions okay so tomorrow we'll go back
to the question of how do we decide
whether it's a minimum or a maximum and
we'll continue exploring functions of
several variables